WARNING: Do NOT copy over the init.txt from an earlier version of DF.
Always read the file carefully, including the comments.

In general, you can copy savegames and tilesets from older DF
versions, but should not copy anything else. You should not, under an
circumstances, unpack a new DF on top of an older one.


Change this to turn sound off.

[SOUND:ON]

The sound volume runs from 0 (off) to 255 (full).  You can set the volume from the ESC options menu as well.

[VOLUME:255]

Change this to skip the wonderful intro movies.

[INTRO:ON]

This lets you set the starting windowed/fullscreen setting.  Can be YES, NO or PROMPT.

[WINDOWED:PROMPT]

This is the initial size and font for windowed mode. You may prefer
the curses_square_16x16.png tileset.

[WINDOWEDX:800]
[WINDOWEDY:600]
[FONT:curses_800x600.png]

Full screen info.  The 0s below mean that the game will choose a
resolution for you, but you can set it yourself as well.

[FULLSCREENX:0]
[FULLSCREENY:0]
[FULLFONT:curses_800x600.png]

If this is set to NO, tiles will be stretched to fit the screen if
there is a resolution mismatch.  If this is set to YES, the tiles will
not be stretched, but rather the game view will be centralized,
surrounded by black space.  Tiles that are too large will always be
compressed rather than running off the screen. As the grid size will
change dynamically to fit, YES is usually best.

[BLACK_SPACE:YES]

Graphics info, most of it as above.  Set GRAPHICS to YES to turn it
all on.  This will use the "raw/graphics" folder for tile information.
Currently this is limited to whatever creature graphics you have
downloaded.  The game comes with a few pictures to demonstrate.  As of
September 2008, the Dwarf Fortress Wiki has graphical tilesets
available at
http://www.dwarffortresswiki.net/index.php/List_of_user_graphics_sets.

[GRAPHICS:NO]
[GRAPHICS_WINDOWEDX:640]
[GRAPHICS_WINDOWEDY:400]
[GRAPHICS_FONT:curses_square_16x16.png]
[GRAPHICS_FULLSCREENX:0]
[GRAPHICS_FULLSCREENY:0]
[GRAPHICS_FULLFONT:curses_square_16x16.png]
[GRAPHICS_BLACK_SPACE:YES]

These settings can have a significant impact on frame rate, especially
for people that have slow frame rates on the title screen.  Available
modes are STANDARD, PARTIAL:<number>, ACCUM_BUFFER, FRAME_BUFFER and
VBO.  The number after PARTIAL refers to how many frames it will redo
a printed tile before skipping it, so you might try increasing it a
bit if you have flickering when PARTIAL is set.  Please note that any
of these combinations might cause frame rates to drop significantly or
cause unpleasant side effects like flickering.

[PRINT_MODE:STANDARD]

Single buffered mode should only be useful for partial mode, not the
four others. It is quite likely to not work at all.

[SINGLE_BUFFER:NO]

Detailed explanation of print_mode settings:

In all modes, there are four arrays involved.
- Vertex array: Tells OpenGL where on the screen the tiles are
- Texture coordinate array: Tells it what to draw in a given tile
- Foreground/background color arrays: Which color to blend into the tiles

Each of the print modes handle these arrays differently.

Standard mode: All arrays start in system memory, are copied through
the PCI bus, and are fully rewritten every frame. The entire window is
redrawn every frame. This is faster than you'd think, and very
reliable.

Partial mode: Unless there is reason to think the whole window must be
redrawn (detecting this is slightly buggy), only the tiles that have
changed are drawn. It otherwise acts as standard mode. The higher the
partial-print number, the slower.

Accum mode: A GL extension is used to copy the entire window to GPU
memory after it's been drawn, and copy it back at the start of each
frame. This makes partial printing more reliable, but is unfortunately
usually pretty slow; your card (or PCI bus) needs to be *really* slow
for this to be a win. Partial printing is on, and locked to 0 redraws.

Frame-buffer mode: A (newer) GL extension is used to draw to an
off-screen texture instead of the window; that whole texture is then
drawn to the window every frame. Partial printing is on, and locked to
0. This is usually slower than actual PARTIAL:0 mode, but more
reliable.

VBO mode: This acts like standard mode, except that a GL extension is
used to keep the (never-changing) vertex array in GPU memory. Partial
printing is off. A lot of cards, particularily older cards or ATI
cards, implement this badly. It is in theory slightly faster than
standard mode, but in practice anything that can use it runs either
code path in approximately zero time.



Change this to YES to keep the DF window on top of your other windows.

[TOPMOST:NO]

Change this to YES if you want to see an FPS counter at the top left.

[FPS:NO]

Use this to set the maximum frame rate during play.  The movies are
always capped at 100.  A frame in this case is not graphical but
related to the movement speed of a creature.  A healthy, unencumbered
dwarven peasant takes one step every 10 frames.

[FPS_CAP:100]

Use this to set the maximum graphical frame refresh rate during play.
Do not, under any circumstances, set above 50. For G_FPS, higher
produces a slower (but smoother?) game.

[G_FPS_CAP:20]

This sets the applications vertical synchronization behavior.
Changing this to ON can impact your FPS if your G_FPS is high.  The
other options are ON and DEFAULT.  DEFAULT uses whatever settings you
have your system at in general.

[VSYNC:OFF]

Change this to NEAREST if you want the texture values to use the
nearest pixel without averaging.  Change this to LINEAR if you want
the texture values to be averaged over the adjacent pixels.

[TEXTURE_PARAM:LINEAR]

Change this to make the dwarfort.exe process have a different
priority.  From highest to lowest, the options are REALTIME, HIGH,
ABOVE_NORMAL, NORMAL, BELOW_NORMAL and IDLE.

[PRIORITY:NORMAL]

Use this to set how fast the game zooms.  The default corresponds to
multiplying by a factor of 1.1 each time the zoom action occurs.  You
can set it anywhere from 1.001 to 1.999. You may find that 2 looks
nice.

[ZOOM_FACTOR:1.100]

Change this to NO if you don't want to have the mouse involved at all.

[MOUSE:YES]

Change this to YES if you'd like to use a BMP for the mouse cursor.
The image currently lags when the game is lagging however.

[MOUSE_PICTURE:NO]

Use these to control the automatic saving behavior in the dwarf
fortress mode of game.  AUTOSAVE can be set to NONE, SEASONAL or
YEARLY.  This updates your save at these intervals, so that some of
your progress will be saved in case of system instability.  You can
set AUTOBACKUP to YES if you want the updated save to be copied to
another folder so that you'll have several copies of your world at
different times.  Set AUTOSAVE_PAUSE to YES if you want the game to
pause every time it autosaves.

[AUTOSAVE:NONE]
[AUTOBACKUP:NO]
[AUTOSAVE_PAUSE:NO]

Set this to YES if you want it to save the game when you start a new
fortress.  If AUTOBACKUP above is set to YES, it will also create a
copy of this new save.

[INITIAL_SAVE:NO]

Set this to YES to make Dwarf Fortress start paused whenever you load
an active game.

[PAUSE_ON_LOAD:NO]

Set this to YES if you want Dwarf Fortress to show the warning window
on embark as a confirmation even if there are no issues.

[EMBARK_WARNING_ALWAYS:NO]

You can change these to ALWAYS and NO.  More restrictive world
parameter settings override these.  ALWAYS lets you see the features
in the Local view during embark, and NO stops you from looking for
features in the site finder (though if you really want to stop the
finder, it might be better for you to generate worlds that restrict
the use of this feature completely, in which case you don't need to
change the settings here).

[SHOW_EMBARK_RIVER:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_POOL:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_M_PIPE:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_M_POOL:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_CHASM:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_PIT:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_OTHER:FINDER]
[SHOW_EMBARK_TUNNEL:FINDER]

Use these options to remove features from the game.  Permitted values
are YES and NO.  Removal might speed the game up in the case of
temperature and weather.

[TEMPERATURE:YES]
[WEATHER:YES]
[ECONOMY:YES]
[INVADERS:YES]
[CAVEINS:YES]
[ARTIFACTS:YES]
[ZERO_RENT:NO]

Change this to YES to output the reasons for world map rejection into
a file.

[LOG_MAP_REJECTS:NO]

Change these numbers to make the embark rectangle start at a different
size.  The format is (EMBARK_RECTANGLE:<width>:<height>).  Numbers may
run from 2 to 16.  The map size warning message will go by these
numbers.

[EMBARK_RECTANGLE:6:6]

Change these numbers to set the default weights for traffic
designations.  If you make the last numbers too large, pathfinding
might lag.  The format is
(PATH_COST:<high>:<normal>:<low>:<restricted>).

[PATH_COST:1:2:5:25]

Alter these options to control how aggressively your dwarves place
objects in a container with like items (rather than an empty
container).  The default options are very aggressive.
STORE_DIST_ITEM_DECREASE controls the cap on objects it will consider
-- for each object it finds in a container, one tile is removed from
its apparent distance to the dwarf, up to this cap.  The others
control how many tiles are removed for each combination type for any
match at all.  For instance, if ITEM_DECREASE is set to 20, and
SEED_COMBINE is set to 100, a dwarf carrying seeds will see a seed bag
with 15 seeds as 115 tiles closer than it actually is (and thus pass
up any empties within that distance), whereas a seed bag with 30 seeds
would be treated as 120 tiles closer (because it hits the
ITEM_DECREASE cap).  Values from 2 to 1000 are permitted.  Before
these init options, the behavior was roughly ITEM_DECREASE 2,
SEED_COMBINE 2 and the rest at 1000.

[STORE_DIST_ITEM_DECREASE:20]
[STORE_DIST_SEED_COMBINE:1000]
[STORE_DIST_BUCKET_COMBINE:1000]
[STORE_DIST_BARREL_COMBINE:1000]
[STORE_DIST_BIN_COMBINE:1000]

Change this to YES to disallow pets from coffin burial as the default
option.

[COFFIN_NO_PETS_DEFAULT:NO]

This controls the display of areas that are far below outside.  The format is
SKY:<character>:<foreground color>:<background color>:<brightness>.
The <character> can be either an ASCII tile number or a character in
quotes, like '#'.

[SKY:178:3:0:0]

As above, for inside/subterranean areas.

[CHASM:250:0:0:1]

This controls the "IDLERS: <number>" that is displayed in dwarf mode.
You can set it to TOP, BOTTOM or OFF.

[IDLERS:TOP]

You can set the maximum population of your fortress here.  Keep in
mind that your population must be at least 80 to get a king and 100 to
obtain the current game features.

[POPULATION_CAP:200]

This allows you to control the number of babies+children in your
fortress.  The first number is an absolute cap on the number of
babies+children.  The second is a percentage of the current number of
adults in your fortress (the default is the essentially meaningless
1000% here).  The lower number is used as the cap.  The cap only
prevents further pregancies, so migrant children, multiple births and
existing pregnancies from old saves can still push you over the cap.
Setting either number to zero will disallow pregnancies in the
fortress.

[BABY_CHILD_CAP:100:1000]

If you don't like the ,.`' ground, try setting this to NO.  The ground
will turn into periods only.

[VARIED_GROUND_TILES:YES]

If you'd like your engravings to start off looking the same (you can
toggle them on individual later), set this to YES.

[ENGRAVINGS_START_OBSCURED:NO]

If you get annoyed by seeing items like *<*sword*>* you can get rid of
the outside ** by setting this to NO.

[SHOW_IMP_QUALITY:YES]

Set this to YES to display fluids as numbers indicating depth.

[SHOW_FLOW_AMOUNTS:NO]

If you'd prefer to have it show the history behind every engraving you
view in dwarf mode, etc., then set this to YES.

[SHOW_ALL_HISTORY_IN_DWARF_MODE:NO]

This controls the number of milliseconds that must pass before a held
key sends an initial repeat press to the game.  You might need to
adjust this.

[KEY_HOLD_MS:150]

This controls the number of milliseconds that must pass before a held
key sends a repeat press to the game after the repeat process has
begun.

[KEY_REPEAT_MS:150]

This controls the number of milliseconds between macro instructions.

[MACRO_MS:150]

This controls the number of milliseconds that must pass before input
works again after the view recenters on an event in dwarf mode.

[RECENTER_INTERFACE_SHUTDOWN_MS:0]

This controls "more" in adventure mode.  If MORE is set to NO, all
announcements will be skipped.  DISPLAY_LENGTH controls how many lines
are printed before it gives you the "more" prompt.

[MORE:YES]
[DISPLAY_LENGTH:23]

Set this to YES if you want traps to affect you in adventure mode.
This is not recommended -- there are lockup issues with cage traps,
and you cannot disarm any of the traps yet, so they effectively stops
you from exploring your old fortresses.

[ADVENTURER_TRAPS:NO]

Set this to NO if you want the game to recenter on your adventurer
only when you've gotten close to the edge of the view.

[ADVENTURER_ALWAYS_CENTER:YES]

This controls the up/down views in adventure mode.  The first
parameter can be OFF, UNHIDDEN, CREATURE or ON.  UNHIDDEN makes the
view appear when it contains any unhidden square.  CREATURE makes the
view appear when it contains a creature.  The second parameter is the
size of the view.  It can be 3, 5, 7 or 9.  A smaller view lets it
stack more of them in the column (3 at size 5, and 5 at size 3).

[ADVENTURER_Z_VIEWS:UNHIDDEN:9]

You can use these to say how nicknames are displayed in each mode
Options are REPLACE_FIRST, CENTRALIZE (between first and last), REPLACE_ALL
[NICKNAME_DWARF:REPLACE_FIRST]
[NICKNAME_ADVENTURE:REPLACE_FIRST]
[NICKNAME_LEGENDS:REPLACE_FIRST]

These are the display colors in RGB.  The game is actually displaying
extended ASCII characters in OpenGL, so you can modify the colors.

[BLACK_R:0]
[BLACK_G:0]
[BLACK_B:0]
[BLUE_R:0]
[BLUE_G:0]
[BLUE_B:128]
[GREEN_R:0]
[GREEN_G:128]
[GREEN_B:0]
[CYAN_R:0]
[CYAN_G:128]
[CYAN_B:128]
[RED_R:128]
[RED_G:0]
[RED_B:0]
[MAGENTA_R:128]
[MAGENTA_G:0]
[MAGENTA_B:128]
[BROWN_R:128]
[BROWN_G:128]
[BROWN_B:0]
[LGRAY_R:192]
[LGRAY_G:192]
[LGRAY_B:192]
[DGRAY_R:128]
[DGRAY_G:128]
[DGRAY_B:128]
[LBLUE_R:0]
[LBLUE_G:0]
[LBLUE_B:255]
[LGREEN_R:0]
[LGREEN_G:255]
[LGREEN_B:0]
[LCYAN_R:0]
[LCYAN_G:255]
[LCYAN_B:255]
[LRED_R:255]
[LRED_G:0]
[LRED_B:0]
[LMAGENTA_R:255]
[LMAGENTA_G:0]
[LMAGENTA_B:255]
[YELLOW_R:255]
[YELLOW_G:255]
[YELLOW_B:0]
[WHITE_R:255]
[WHITE_G:255]
[WHITE_B:255]
